[13612] PKCS #11 tutorial (#41)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/pkcs11_tutorial.rst

.. _vulcanexus_pkcs11_tutorial:

> ROS 2 Security improved with Hardware Security Modules (HSM) using Vulcanexus Core

Reviewer: I think we are going to move this tutorial into a `security` section, so something like `Storing private keys in Hardware Secure Modules (HSM)`

==========================================================================================

.. contents:: Table of Contents
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

> `ROS 2 Security <https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Concepts/About-Security.html>`_ is implemented by means of the `DDS Security specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS-SECURITY/About-DDS-SECURITY/>`_.

Author: Not necessarily. ROS 2 has several DDS implementations :wink: Nevertheless, I have included a reference to Fast DDS

The security files required by the aforementioned specification are encapsulated within the ROS 2 security enclaves.
This approach allows to set different security policies for different nodes, processes, users, or devices by defining different enclaves with the corresponding permissions.
However, ROS 2 currently requires that the private key used to encrypt and decrypt the enclave information is also stored within the enclave, which might be a security vulnerability.

> Hardware Security Modules (HSM) can be used in order to mitigate this vulnerability and PKCS #11 standard provides an API to interact with these devices.

Reviewer: I'd divide this sentence into two and and some short of link for HSMs

Vulcanexus Core provides the required support for HSM devices so the private key, instead of being stored in the filesystem, it could be inside the HSM device.

> This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions to improve ROS 2 Security of a talker/listener demo with HSM using Vulcanexus Core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions to secure the communications within the ROS 2 talker/listener demo by the means of a HSM and leveraging Vulcanexus Core enhanced security capabilities.
```

Prerequisites
-------------

This tutorial does not require a physical HSM device connected to the test environment.

> Instead, a software HSM emulator is going to be installed and used to run this tutorial.
> 
> Run the following commands to install the required packages:
> 
> .. code-block:: bash
> 
>     sudo apt update && apt install --yes --no-install-recommends \
>       softhsm2 \
>       gnutls-bin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```suggestion
Instead, a software HSM emulator is going to be installed and used.
Run the following commands to install the required packages (administrative privileges may be required):

.. code-block:: bash
    apt update
    apt install --yes --no-install-recommends \
      softhsm2 \
      gnutls-bin
```
```

Please, also remember to source the environment in every terminal in this tutorial.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash

ROS 2 Security infrastructure
-----------------------------

First of all the required security enclave to run this tutorial has to be generated using the ROS 2 CLI.

> ROS 2 enclaves are saved within a keystore generated running the following commands:

Reviewer: I'd generate one enclave for each application, as well as two tokens later on.

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir vulcanexus_hsm_ws && cd vulcanexus_hsm_ws
    ros2 security create_keystore vulcanexus_demo_keystore
    ros2 security create_enclave vulcanexus_demo_keystore /talker_listener

For more information about ROS 2 security infrastructure, please refer to `this tutorial <https://docs.ros.org/en/rolling/Tutorials/Advanced/Security/The-Keystore.html>`_.

Generate HSM token
------------------

The private key that has been generated by ROS 2 CLI is going to be substituted by a virtual HSM using PKCS #11.
Therefore, the ``key.pem`` auto-generated file within the enclave is going to be replaced by a ``key.p11`` file with the PKCS #11 URI.
As already explained, this tutorial emulates the HSM using ``softHSM``.
Generate the HSM token running:

.. code-block:: bash

>     softhsm2-util --init-token --free --label vulcanexus_demo --pin VulcanexusDemo --so-pin vulcanexus_demo

Author: I run the tutorial within a docker so maybe privileged permissions are required. I could not run the tutorial in my laptop because there are no binaries for Vulcanexus Humble in Focal. I can run the tutorial in Vulcanexus Galactic and see if I have any trouble. I do not remember anything related to a specific group...

.. code-block:: bash

    export ROS_SECURITY_KEYSTORE=[path_to_workspace]/vulcanexus_demo_keystore
    export ROS_SECURITY_ENABLE=true
    export ROS_SECURITY_STRATEGY=Enforce

The latest environment variable ensures that if the security files are not correct ROS 2 will not be initialized.

If the pin is not included in the PKCS #11 URI, then remember to also export the following environment variable:

.. code-block:: bash

    export FASTDDS_PKCS11_PIN=VulcanexusDemo

Please, remember to also source Vulcanexus installation before launching the following commands.

In the first terminal launch the talker:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp talker --ros-args --enclave /talker_listener

In the second terminal launch the listener:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener --ros-args --enclave /talker_listener

Communication between both nodes is established.

If a second listener is launched in a third terminal without security (do not set the environment variables but remember to source Vulcanexus installation), this node will not be included into the communication.

.. code-block:: bash

>     ros2 run demo_nodes_cpp listener

Reviewer: I think this could be a small section on its own.

.. _vulcanexus_pkcs11_tutorial:

ROS 2 Security improved with Hardware Security Modules (HSM) using Vulcanexus Core
==================================================================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

`ROS 2 Security <https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Concepts/About-Security.html>`_ is implemented by means of the `DDS Security specification <https://www.omg.org/spec/DDS-SECURITY/About-DDS-SECURITY/>`_.
Specifically, when using Vulcanexus, security is implemented through `Fast DDS security plugins <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/security/security.html#security>`_.
The security files required by the aforementioned specification are encapsulated within the ROS 2 security enclaves.
This approach allows to set different security policies for different nodes, processes, users, or devices by defining different enclaves with their corresponding permissions.
However, ROS 2 currently requires that the private key used to encrypt and decrypt the enclave information is also stored within the enclave as plain text, which might pose a security vulnerability.

> Hardware Security Modules (HSM) can be used in order to mitigate this vulnerability.
> And `PKCS #11 standard <http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v2.40/os/pkcs11-base-v2.40-os.html>`_ provides an API to interact with these devices.
> Vulcanexus Core provides the required support for HSM devices so the private key, instead of being stored in the filesystem, it could be inside the HSM device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such vulnerability can be mitigated through the use of Hardware Security Modules (HSM).
These modules provide a query API compliant with the `PKCS #11 standard <http://docs.oasis-open.org/pkcs11/pkcs11-base/v2.40/os/pkcs11-base-v2.40-os.html>`_ for which Vulcanexus Core (through Fast DDS) provides the required support so the private keys, instead of being stored in the filesystem, could be kept inside HSM devices.
```

This tutorial provides step-by-step instructions to secure the communications within the ROS 2 talker/listener demo by the means of a HSM and leveraging Vulcanexus Core enhanced security capabilities.

Prerequisites
-------------

This tutorial does not require a physical HSM device connected to the test environment.
Instead, a software HSM emulator is going to be installed and used.
Run the following commands to install the required packages (administrative privileges may be required):

.. code-block:: bash

    apt update
    apt install --yes --no-install-recommends \
      softhsm2 \
      gnutls-bin

Note that `softhsm2` package creates a new group called `softhsm`.
In order to grant access to the HSM module a user must belong to this group.

> Run the following command (administrative privileges may be required):

Reviewer: I'd clarify that this is not needed for the root user

Reviewer: What I meant was more that root users do not need to be added to the `softhsm` group.

```
In order to grant access to the HSM module, non-root user must belong to this group (root users already have permission).
To add a user to the group, run the following command (administrative privileges may be required):
```

Author: Done!

.. code-block:: bash

    usermod -a -G softhsm <user>

> For this command to take effect, the user should log in into its account again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this command to take effect, the user should log out and in again into its account.
```
